Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we will create a new page that only lists events that took place in the past because
as of this moment on our homepage, we have upcoming events and that won't show any events from the
past.
And even if we click on view all events, this archive also will not show events from the past.
However, you could imagine a situation where someone comes to our website and maybe they want to review
a recap of the events that we've done in prior years.
So let's go ahead and create a brand new page entirely and name it past events.
So the first step is just to simply go into the admin and you might have guessed it.
Let's hover over pages in the sidebar and click on Add New.
Let's give it a title of past events and we can leave the main content field completely blank.
And then let's click, publish or save.
OK, now we can use this link here to preview that page that we just created.
OK, so this is what we would expect to see right we left the main content field blank and we know that
at this moment, the template file in our theme folder that's powering this screen is page dot.
However, if we want to write custom code here to pull in a list of events that took place in the past,
we are going to need a new unique special template file for this past events.
So let me show you what we can do in our text editor within the root of our theme folder.
I want you to create a brand new file, and the name of this new file is very important.
I want you to name it Page and then a dash and then the name of the slug for that page that we just
created.
If you can't remember what a slug is right here on the edit screen, see this permalink, the bold part
that's at the end is the slug for that page.
So in this case, the slug is passed dash events.
So back in our text editor, let's name this new file page, dash past dash events, dot HP.
And then just as a test, I want you to type out hello.
One, two, three, or just any test sentence, save it.
And then if we go back to that past events URL and refresh, cool.
We can see that that brand new template file is controlling this you URL.
Now we don't actually want to say hello.
One, two, three.
So let's delete that.
And instead let's just copy and paste the contents from archive event into this file and use it as a
template or starting place.
So within my archive event file, I'm just going to select the entire page and copy it into my clipboard
and then back in that brand new file, just paste it in and up at the very top.
Let's change the heading level one title.
So instead of reading all events, but set it to say past events and let's change the subtitle to a
recap of our past events.
So let's save that.
And this is fairly interesting.
So this is the while loop part of the template that loops through any and all posts that are getting
queried now, because the euro that we are on is tied to a page that one single past events page is
the only item being queried.
Right.
This is the default U.
RL based query.
So back in our code, if we scroll down right above this while loop, we just need to create a custom
query that will load any event posts where the date is less than today's date.
So you know the drill by now when you want to create a custom query, the first step is to create a
variable.
We can name it whatever we want.
Let's call it past events, and let's set it to equal a new instance of the WordPress class that's named
WP.
Underscore query.
OK, then, remember, within these parentheses here, we provide WordPress with an array of options.
Let's drop down to a new line in between those parentheses and what do we want to query for?
Well, for our first parameter, let's say post type should equal event.
OK, now before we save this and take it for a spin right away, let's remember that our loop code should
reference this object that we just created.
Right.
Because at the moment this loop code is going to look at the current default Eurail based query.
But we want to use our past events object query.
So let's modify this loop code right before have posts.
We just want to look within this object.
So right here, let's just say past events and then to look inside an object and it's just Dasch greater
than and then let's do the same thing for the post.
So right before that, just begin with our object, our query object past events, look inside it and
then call the post.
Cool.
So let's save that and refresh.
So that loaded all event posts, but we only want the ones where the event date is in the past, so
let's go back to our code.
And instead of manually typing out the perfect query here, I think we can save ourselves a lot of typing
by just recycling the query from our home page.
So right now, I want you to open up front page dot p and you'll remember that we wrote this custom
query on the home page that only pulls in the two most recent events.
So instead of typing all of this out again, let's just copy it all into our clipboard.
Let's even be sure to grab the today variable up here at the top.
And let's select all the way down to this semicolon right before the while loop begins.
OK, so with that in my clipboard, back in our brand new page dash past events template, let's just
delete this past events variable we created a moment ago and instead paste in our clipboard and let's
just rename the query to past events.
Right equals a new instance of WP query and now it's much faster to just modify this instead of typing
it out again so we can delete this first parameter posts per page.
We don't need to limit it to just two.
We are happy with the WordPress.
Default of ten post type looks good medically in order by look good, so does order ascending.
Really all we need to change is the meta query.
So let's just say only posts where the event date and then instead of greater than or equal to let's
just say are less than today's date.
OK, so if I save that and refresh cool.
We only see the one event that took place in the past.
So that was simple enough.
The real challenge of this lesson is getting pagination to work.
Now, we can't test pagination links unless we have multiple posts.
So right now, let's go create another event where the event date is in the past.
It's back in our admin click on ADD new event.
Let's give it a title of New Year twenty sixteen pasting some dummy content and most importantly for
the event date.
Let's set it all the way back to 2015, December thirty first.
Right.
So it's clearly in the past.
OK, so now if we go back and refresh this past event screen, there it is.
Now let's go ahead and try to test out our pagination links.
So in order to do that, you could imagine that we could set posts per page to one.
Right.
That would force pagination links down at the bottom.
So let's add a new parameter and say posts per page equals one.
Be sure to include a comma at the end there.
Let's save that.
OK, so we only see one post now, but we still don't see any pagination links to go to the next page
of results, even though in our template file down at the bottom we do have echo pazhani links.
And this is because in general, WordPress pagination only works out of the box with the default queries
that WordPress makes on its own that are tied to the current U.
RL.
Right.
So that's why the pagination links worked on the generic events archive screen, because in that case
we just manipulated the default query.
But in this case, since we are on a slash past events page URL and we're relying on our own custom
query, we're going to have to jump through a few hoops in order to get pagination working.
So back in our text editor down here towards the very bottom of our brand new template file, this pagination
links function is trying to work with the default Eurail based query.
So in that case, there's nothing to pagination right.
WordPress thinks that we're just trying to pull in the one past events page.
Remember that page where we left the main content field blank?
So what we need to do is within these parentheses, we need to give this function information about
our custom query.
So let's give it an array and then dropdown in between the parentheses and we need to tell it how many
pages of results there's going to be.
Right.
So, for example, if we had thirty total events and we had ten per page, well, there would be three
pages of results.
So let's target the parameter named total and let's set it to equal.
Now, we don't just want a hard code, a number here and guess right to make it dynamic.
What we can do is dig in to our query object that we created up towards the top of this file.
Remember, we named it past events.
We just want to look within that object dash greater than.
For a property named Max Knowm pages, at this point, we've given this pageant links function all of
the information that it needs.
So now if we save this and refresh.
Cool.
We do indeed see pagination links, but we are not done yet.
Before I click on Next noticed that the current event we see is New Year 2016.
So when I click on next to go to page two of results, you would expect to see a different post.
But we don't.
We still see the same one, even though up in the address bar we see page two.
That's not working yet.
And that's because our custom query that we wrote is not paying attention to page results yet.
So to fix this, let's go back up to the top of our new template file up here when we are creating our
custom query and we just need to add on a new parameter named page.
So this tells the custom query which page number of results it should be on.
So, again, for example, if we had 30 total posts and we were using 10 posts per page, there would
be three pages worth of results.
Right.
So we could hard code a value here.
So, for example, it's just hard code, a value of two and save that.
And when we refresh now, instead of New Year 2016, we do indeed see math up.
But we don't want to hard code a number here, because now, even if I go back to the first page of
results, instead of seeing New Year twenty sixteen again, we see math meet up.
So the question becomes instead of hard coding, which page number of results this should be, the question
is how do we get the number that is up in the euro bar?
Right.
If we see the number two at the end of the URL here, that's the number we want to use in our query.
Well, to make things dynamic, back in our text editor, let's delete that hardcoded two and instead
we can run a function named get query var in this function can be used to get all sorts of information
about the current RL.
In our case, we are interested in that number at the end.
Write the page result.
So the property name that we want is just paged and then just to play it safe we can add on a comma
and then a second argument and we can say number one.
And what that's going to do is even if you go back to the first result, the first page CIA, it doesn't
have a page slash one like we saw from page two.
Well, this second argument is sort of the fallback or default number that will be used if WordPress
can't find the page number dynamically.
OK, so this highlighted code is saying go out and get that number at the end of the page DRL and if
there isn't one to get, that probably just means we're on the first page of results.
So you number one.
So if we save that.
I'm on page two of results and we see math meet up, and if I use these pagination links to go back
to page one, perfect, we see New Year twenty sixteen.
So that means pagination at this point in time is working.
The moral of the story is that when you're using custom queries instead of relying on the default you
based queries, there are a few hoops that you have to jump through.
But it is possible to get pagination up and running.
Now that we've tested out our pagination, we can safely go into our custom query and delete this posts
per page equals one.
Cool.
So now we can rest assured that once there are more than 10 past events, pagination will kick in and
do its job.
Now, before we bring this lesson to a close, we should probably create a link that points towards
this past events page somewhere else on our website.
Right.
How are the visitors supposed to navigate to this page?
So up in the header, let's click on events to go to the events archive.
And I'm thinking down here at the bottom of this archive, we add a bit of text that reads, looking
for a recap of past events, click here.
So to add that, let's jump into our text editor and open up the archive event file.
We can scroll down to the very bottom right after this.
Echo pagination links and the closing tag.
Let's just add a paragraph and say looking for a recap of past events, check out our Past Events archive
and then we probably want to wrap these words within an HTML link.
So open up in a tag.
Close the tag.
Let's give it an address attribute.
Now, if your sandbox development website lives at the root of a domain, you could just say slash past
events.
But if you're using man, for example, sometimes your WordPress site lives within a subdirectory of
a domain.
So for the ref, what I like to do just to be safe is drop into P and echo out the results of a function
named site U.
RL, and then within those parentheses we can just say slash past events and this function will generate
an absolute U.
RL based on the ending portion that we provided.
So let's save that.
Here it is.
Now, this will get the job done, but we can improve the visual styling, right?
There should probably be more of a vertical gap here.
So back in our code, right above that new paragraph, let's create an HTML horizontal rule element
and let's give it a class of section break just for a bit of CSFs styling.
Cool, so that creates a subtle border and more vertical spacing.
And now if we actually click on this link to test it out, perfect.
But I do notice one thing we can fix up in the header navigation.
The events link should be lit up as yellow because we are on the past events page.
So to fix that header detail, let's jump into our text editor and open header up.
Here's our navigation menu.
Let's scroll down a bit to find the events link.
So here's the list, item and link for events.
You can see we've already got one conditional check.
So we're saying if the post type of the default you are all based query is event, then echo out a class
that will make the link yellow.
So on the past events page, this will not evaluate to true because the default query on this URL is
just this one single page named Past Events.
So back in our code, what we can do right after this equal equal event, let's just say or and then
call a function name is Page and for the argument past events.
OK, so if this evaluates to true or if this evaluates to true, go ahead and light the link up as yellow.
So we're on the past events page and it lights up perfect.
And if we go back to the main events archive, it's still lights up.
That's going to bring this lesson to a close.
In our next lesson, we will completely change gears and create a brand new post Type four programs.
Each program post will be a major like math or biology or history.
And the fun part is that we're going to learn how to create relationships between events and programs.
Learning how to create relationships from one post to another is one of the most powerful components
of WordPress.
This is where things are going to speed up a bit.
It's going to be a lot of fun.
Let's keep it rolling and I will see you then.